title: Internship at Oracle
date: 2013-09-02
tags: University of Waterloo, Internship

My first co-op job experience was incredible: I moved down to Boston to work
with a big-name company right across the street from MIT. Basically, I was in
Heaven.

The product I was working on was their Endeca Information Discovery system.
Basically, it was a system which would push user data (read: Excel spreadsheets)
into Oracle databases and then run information discovery on them to determine
data trends, groupings, et cetera.

My first major project was to expand the data input system to include JSON as a
data source. Since JSON data and standard databases are fairly different in
structure, a large part of this task was in determining exactly how the data
should be converted. In the end, I wrote a streaming parser (which, for example,
could be connected to an auto-updating URL like Twitter's firehouse) which made
heavy use of determined flattening (figuring out which key was most important
and flattening the data around that) and multi-selection (basically, data
structures within other data structures in the Oracle DB).

I also dealt with increasing the number of useable back-end databases. EID was
initially only able to interface with a few pre-selected databases (MySQL 5+,
Oracle 11, and SQLite 3, IIRC). By re-configuring the interface between EID and
the database connection, I was able to expand this list to include any database
which had JDBC drivers.

I finished the term by writing an installation script for the full EID stack.
This was previously a notoriously difficult product to install, but can now be
installed and configured for any environment with one click.
