title: A Week in Cuba
date: 2017-07-11
tags: Travel

So, my original plan was to post a regular travel journal over the month of July
as I, er, travelled, but that plan got thrown out the window on the first day.
I've collected the my first week of posts here, and... well, we'll see about
posting smaller chunks in the future.

## Tuesday, July 4th
Well, its my first night in Cuba. So far... hmm. Its not that I'm not excited to
be here, looking forward to the week, or anything like that. But going so far as
to say "so far, so good"? Eh, not quite; this trip has started off a bit rocky.

First off, the root of most of my issues today and likely many more going
forward? No phone coverage here. I know, I know, that's normally pretty well
expected when visiting a foreign country that isn't quite first-world or
whatever politically-correct term we're calling it nowadays. But I have Project
Fi, and I checked their website and was assured they'd have service here, and
planned accordingly. Maybe I misread it, I can't be sure, but I'm fairly
confident. Calling, texting, data, you name it. I can't exactly check now,
either. Obviously. Maybe they have service in some areas of Cuba? Mind, if they
have no service in Varadero or Havana... well, I'd be shocked if they covered
anywhere else.

So, problems that caused: well, for one, not a single taxi driver at the airport
knew where my hotel was. Other than, you know: in Havana. And I couldn't pull up
a map to show them because -- in addition to having no cell coverage -- there is
no public wifi. A single one of the taxi drivers, their coordinator (I think?),
had a map pre-loaded on his phone, but when he searched for "Bella Habana", he
clicked the wrong result, and absolutely refused to try again or let me point
out which one I meant. Eventually, I found a driver that seemed to have a rough
idea and was willing to stop for directions when we got nearby. One short
pantomime, one long car ride, and many many halting conversation in broken
Spanish later, we made it to the hotel.

Which reminds me of the second major issue. My Spanish is NOWHERE NEAR close to
fluent. I don't know what the fuck my high school Spanish teacher was doing in
grade eleven telling me I was fluent, and whatever test she had me write that
"proves it" was clearly something entirely different. Honestly, I don't even
understand; I know I could understand every word she said, answer any question
she asked, hold a conversation about any topic she brought up. I'm pretty
confident I haven't forgotten too much since then, my vocab seems to be what I
remember. But holy shit-balls Batman, a good 90% of the words these people are
speaking sound nothing like I remember. My best guess is my teacher taught us
the Spanish equivalent of made-up baby-talk and a small, esoteric vocabulary of
unused words. Everything I say seems to get odd looks and muddled comprehension,
even when I'm really damn sure I said what I meant to say.

I'm gonna be honest, there was a while tonight where I genuinely thought I'd
fucked up royally and they speak something other than Spanish here. Obviously
that's not the case, but... well, this week is gonna be interesting, put it that
way. The accents don't help either; I'm pretty sure my taxi driver dropped the
third letter of every word. Yeah, you read that right.

So, on the way to the hotel, I asked my taxi driver how much the ride was gonna
cost and whether he'd mind if I could pay in USD. Keep in mind the above
language barrier while I tell you about this conversation that took us about
ten, maybe fifteen minutes, by the way. He quoted more than I had, so I asked if
he'd mind stopping at a bank first. He said the banks were closed this late (9pm
or so), but he'd be willing to come back tomorrow. That sounded fantastic to me.

Well, turns out that wasn't quite what was understood on his side. My best guess
is he was telling me that _he_ would go to the bank tomorrow, so therefore
paying in USD was perfectly fine. Lovely. Fortunately, I had a bunch of Canadian
as well, so we figured something out after he pulled someone aside and asked
them what they think Canadian Dollars were worth in Cuban Pesos.

If only I had my phone plan, eh?

I... probably overpayed for the cab ride, Hell maybe I got scammed, I'm
genuinely not sure at this point. Seems like the fare was... somewhat
reasonable? I really have no standards to go by here, so mostly I'm just hoping.
Either way, it doesn't much matter at this point. If only I had some way to use
my phone to find out what the fare should have been. NO I AM NOT BITTER.

Once I got into the hotel, the fun continued; the receptionist wanted the
voucher they emailed me in order to sign in. That's fine, I have it on my phone,
let me just pull it up -- oh wait, again, no cell plan, can't open the PDF.
Mind, I can see the actual body of the emil, where they stuffed four pages of
marketing material, perfectly fine. The more clever amongst you may be noticing
a trend here.

Fortunately, THANK GOD, the receptionist spoke some English. Not much, mind, but
between her broken English and my broken Spanish we figured it out.

Okay, now that I got the ranting out of the way, let's think about the good
things that have happened so far. Given it was a day filled with plane rides,
don't expect too much here.

Let's see... I overheard two maybe-twenty-year-old guys walking through the
Montreal airport today. One said to the other "Well, of course I know I'm
racist, that's why I'm single". You have to hand it to the kid; at least he's
self-aware.

Speaking of going through the Montreal airport, side note, its an odd thing to
have flown Winnipeg -> Montreal -> Cuba. Couple things stick out:

1. I "learned" (read: "did not learn") those languages in that order, which I
thought was a neat little coincidence, and
2. The Montreal -> Cuba leg where we were being told how to fill in Spanish
forms in French? As far as I could tell, many of the passengers were pretty damn
confused. I was mostly fine -- at least my French teacher actually tought me the
actual language -- but for some reason Air Canada didn't seem to have staffed
any native English-speaking flight attendants, so there was even more broken
fumbling in language going on there.
3. In Montreal I was joined by, and often confused for being a part of,
something called "S Trip", which seems to be a Canada-wide party for high school
graduates where they all hang out in Cuba for a week. Sounds super fun, but I
definitely wasn't that loud and obnoxious when I was a teenager. Kids these
days.

Odd weather patterns while we were driving into Havana: it was thundering and
lightning-ing the entire time, but there was no rain at all. Then, very
suddenly, there would be a torrential downpour for about five, maybe ten
minutes, followed by an equally abrupt stop. This happened about three times
along the way -- the thunder and lightning continued the entire time. During one
of the downpours, my taxi driver pointed out a motorcyclist and laughed.

Setting my alarm for tomorrow took non-zero effort. I'm not sure how, given the
no-cell-service thing, but it looks like my phone did update to the correct
timezone at some point during the taxi ride. Bit of luck for me; due to a series
of unfortunate events™ my watch is no longer synced to my phone, so that gives
me a nice, constant reference point to be sure of.

I took a walk down the main (? ish?) street near the hotel once I settled in.
Cool buildings to see, but nothing that I'd be returning to within about a
twenty minute walk on either side of the hotel. Hopefully I just picked the
wrong directions to explore. Its fucking hot, even at midnight; I love it, but I
should have bought sandals.

So, things to do tomorrow, besides the obvious "explore and enjoy myself":

- get a physical map of the city
- find an internet cafe (if they exist? The receptionist here just laughed and
shooked her head when I asked if there was anywhere nearby to get wifi. My
thought at the time was just that the hotel doesn't have wifi, but in retrospect
I haven't found anyone with internet access yet...) to
    * check on Fi, maybe I just need to enable some roaming-in-Cuba setting?
    * look up all the stuff that I really should have checked before I got the
    impression I could use my phone here
    * make sure people (such as the future landlord expecting a response this
    week) know I will be out-of-contact for a while
- find a bank

So, in summary... fuck it: ignore everything I just wrote. This is fantastic;
its been ages since I've plopped myself down in a new city to explore and just
see what happens. Would it be better if I had data when I needed it? If it
wasn't so hot I was sweating like a pig when I went for a midnight walk? If I
could speak the language even half as well as I thought? Absolutely. Will that
dampen my fun? Not one iota.

## Wednesday, July 5th
Quick morning update before I head out. Breakfast (at the hotel) was tasty; I
didn't know what half the stuff was, which was half the fun, but it was all
delicious. The coffee was terrible, but eh, it was coffee. I'm not one to
complain about the nectar of the Gods.

I got myself a map from the front desk, which I'm currently looking over. Its
one of those tourist maps, with only the various interesting chunks of the city
shown. No idea yet where they are in relation to each other. I found where I am
in one of the sections, though, so at least I have some idea of how to get to
interesting nearby places.

The map cost me two pesos (1 CUC == $1 USD), which required I find myself a bank
nearby first. Bit of an issue there, turns out they will not exchange American
money for pesos if the American money has even the slightest rip or tear. Given
I brought a few hundred in very slightly torn American money, this might be a
problem. The teller found a single $20 bill they were willing to accept. And...
my debit card was declined at the ATM outside. I'm going to assume it was
because I was using an American one.

So much for my perfect plan of staying in Canada until my Canadian accounts were
drained and then travelling to drain my American accounts.

Upon further inspection, it seems my Canadian credit card is the only way I have
to get money here. Kind of unfortunate given its converting CAD -> USD -> CUC
and thus costing me roughly one metric shit-ton per peso, but there's not much I
can do about that. Note to self: transfer money to Canada before my next credit
card bill.

---

I ended up biting off... less?... than I could chew. The distances here decieved
me, I finished my loop around the chunk of the city and ended up back around the
hotel around 1 PM. Took a nice siesta, and here we are.

Which reminds me. My taxi driver from last night had pointed out a group of
people playing music and drinking and called it a siesta. Am I the one that is
wrong? Nah, that can't be right.

Anyway, I'm loving the architecture around here. The vast majority of everything
is run down and half-broken, which just makes the few well-maintained monuments
and such that much more impressive. I headed North today, and saw a bunch of
churches, a massive graveyard (something like six by eight city blocks), and
then sat by the Ocean a while. Note to self: bring a book next time, that'd be a
great place to read for a few hours.

It took me a bit to get a hang of my bearings, did you know they use rocks as
street signs? Very nice rocks, I'm sure, but I certainly wasn't checking on the
ground behind overgown shrubs to figure out what street I was on at first. Looks
like they used whatever rock of decent size they could find nearby for the
signs; kind of makes walking around the city into a scavenger hunt.

Interestingly, not all street corners are marked off. Invariably, the ones that
are are four-way stops: each of the corners has a rock, and each rock has only
one street name, with matching pairs diagonally across the intersection. As far
as I've been able to tell, the street-sign-rocks have to be read clockwise
around the intersection.

I saw a massive monument off to the East on my way back to the hotel, which I'll
probably check out either tonight or tomorrow. That'll probably be my plan for
tomorrow actually, is to head Eastish to that coast and see what's that way;
looks like there's a bunch more monuments, museums, art galleries, and such that
way.

Not sure where I'll head for dinner yet; there's a huge market with a bunch of
shops and restaurants somewhat nearby, I might head there. A bunch of the people
I chatted with today recommended a place called "Centro Vasco" for dinner, which
is right about at the farthest point I was today, maybe an hour walk from here.
Bit far, but maybe I'll check it out. If not today, tomorrow.

That said, looping back to the hotel probably wasn't such a bad idea. Walking
for four plus hours (minus some sitting by the Ocean and on a patio for a beer)
under the hot Cuban sun sure took it out of me. Maybe being indoors for the
couple hottest hours in the middle of the day is a good call... we'll see. I'm
sure my tolerance for this heat will be much better within a day or two.

Chatted with a bunch of people around the city while I was out and had a bit
more success in communication. Still a struggle for anything complex, but... eh,
at least I can get the point across.

## Thursday, July 6th
So much for that plan. I took my painkillers & antibiotics for the evening (woo
wisdom teeth surgery) and they put me right out until morning. Today was a lot
more fun, though.

I started walking East, towards the Jose Marti monument. Apparently, the massive
marble tower in the middle of the city isn't meant to be viewed from too
closely, though; when I started approaching the large greenspace surrounding it,
I got waved away by two soldiers. Yeah, I'm not touching any piece of that. The
view from afar was good enough for me, thanks. Did I mention yet that most of
the soldiers (police, I suppose) around here carry machineguns? Mmhm, staying
far away from that monument, thank you very much.

Anyway, I walked a bit further and found the National Public Library. Sadly,
foreigners are only allowed to walk down one central hallway, where they've
arranged a bunch of displays. Some very cool pictures, posters, and books along
there, mind. More of a museum than a library, though. Also, not very "Public".

After the library, I continued Eastward and started chatting with a musician.
Turns out he is performing tomorrow evening; he gave me the address and, once we
got to talking, offered to find me a saxophone so I could play with him. The
offer sounds fun to me, plan is to head over there tomorrow night.

He showed me around town a bit and took me into Central Havana, which sees a lot
less tourism than the rest of the city. Some very cool architecture through
there. We grabbed a phenomenal lunch and I bought some cigars for gifts (Fresh
from the factory! That... almost certainly doesn't make them any better than
store-bought. Cheaper, though!).

On my way back, I got to chatting with a different guy who offered to trade me
local pesos for converted pesos. And, yes, its technically a rip-off, I know the
exchange rate. But, then again, foreigners also aren't technically allowed to
get local pesos, so I don't much mind paying a few bucks for a cool keepsake.

## Friday, July 7th
Well, it should come as a surprise to absolutely no one that I am not quite as
good at soprano sax as I am at tenor, especially given its been years since I've
played seriously. That said, the concert was fantastic! I had a wonderful time;
we played on a stage right next to the ocean, late enough in the evening that I
wasn't sweating my balls off.

There's such a great atmosphere here for music, for dancing... I love it.
There's bar after bar along the coast with stages set up every night -- though
it seems like Friday and Saturday are the busiest nights. There's also a massive
stage a bit farther away where the "best music" is played, according to my
shitty Spanish-English translation abilities. I'll probably check it out
tomorrow night.

Backing up a bit, my plan today was to head to the club for the concert way
early to make sure I found it and then hang out in that area for a while, see
what's around there, sit by the ocean a while, maybe read a bit.

Literally none of that ended up happening.

About halfway from my hotel to the club, I got into a conversation with some guy
on the street, named Santiago. He ended up showing me around a bunch; one very
cool thing he showed me was a very out-of-the way street where an artist had
painted the entirety of the street. The whole place was phenomenal, the street,
the sides of the houses, all painted, with a bunch of paintings hanging all
around, as well. The artist himself was around, too, apparently he loves to
paint in public with people watching and admiring.

My understanding is there are daily art classes for children there and the
entire thing is some massive community art project -- fantastic!

A ways away, Santiago showed me to a bar that had some wonderful drinks;
Hemingways, he called them. I'll have to look up the ingredients later.
Interestingly, the bar was filled with tourists; apparently this was very
abnormal, since we weren't really anywhere near the tourist areas of the city.
Turns out a bunch of them had basically stumbled across the place at random.

From what I recall, there was a couple from Venezuela (originally from England),
a girl from Poland, a couple from France, and a guy from Wisconsin. Not sure
what the odds are we all stumbled into the same bar at the same time, given what
area of the city we were in, but it was a fun time nonetheless. First time I've
spoken English in a few days, too, which was a very odd feeling.

For dinner, we went to Santiago's favorite restaurant, which was actually
somewhat near my hotel. I knew there was a benefit to getting a hotel in the
city instead of in tourist central! I never would have even known it was a
restaurant without him, the entrance looks no different than the houses
surrounding it. As far as I could see, there was no sign for the place or
anything. But, eh, they make a delicious chicken breast for only a few bucks, so
I might have to go back at some point.

I ran into two ladies from New York earlier in the day; they were asking around
to find "wifi cards", which they explained were how you can access the internet
in this country. Given the people I've asked about that haven't mentioned these
cards, and that the New Yorkers have apparently been searching for five days now
with no luck, I don't think that sounds very likely. They also mentioned "wifi
parks", though they had no idea what those actually were besides the obvious
guess based on the name. I'll ask around, but I'm not going to put much stock in
it.

There was one thing about Santiago that confused me all day, that took me far
too long to figure out. Its blatantly obvious in retrospect, but at the time...
well. Let's just say I must not have been thinking clearly today.

Let's see; I told Santiago about the concert tonight and let him know where it
was, since he seemed very interested in music. He said something about how many
girls in Cuba loved to dance at these concerts, and I made some quip about
flirting being difficult when you don't speak the same languages. He laughed,
and I thought he understood. Oh boy, was I wrong.

Fast-forward about an hour, we're walking through Old Havana and he starts
speaking to this girl; gorgeous, I've gotta admit, an absolute knock-out. I
didn't understand much of the conversation, but he introduced me, chatted with
her a while, then took down her number and mentioned the concert. She seemed
pretty enthused about that. Now, at first I thought he had just seen someone he
recognized, but by the end of the conversation it seemed more like he'd found
himself a date for the evening -- hey, good for him.

Fast-forward another hour or two, when we're sitting around after dinner. We had
drinks, cigars, and we were sitting around killing time. He joked about how much
it costs to have a girlfriend, and I commiserated, and then he asked for a more
precise estimate on how much it costs to have a girlfriend in Canada. I had him
rephrase a few times, since that sentence didn't quite make sense to me, and it
only really clicked when he said, "For example, in Havana it costs 40 CUC to
have a girlfriend for one night." Or, as we call it: to hire a hooker.

I'm gonna be honest, even then I didn't make the connection that the girl from
earlier was a hooker until we parted ways after dinner. I'd thought he was going
to join me and meet the girl there, but he begged off as being tired and made
sure to remind me to go back to that street corner for the girl tonight after
the concert.

So, yeah. That's the story of how someone tried to hire a hooker for me. I'm
gonna be honest here, that was quite literally one of the last things I would
have expected.

## Saturday, July 8th
I spent the night listening to music at the massive stage I mentioned earlier.
Calling it "the best music" might be over-reaching a bit, but it was certainly a
wonderful evening. The latin jazz here feels like the life-blood of the people,
there's no one around the city who doesn't hang out at a stage like this at
least now and then. Far cry from back home, where its completely reasonable to
have not seen any live music in the past month.

As for earlier in the day, mostly I stumbled around with the rough goal of
figuring out what those "wifi parks" are. I came across a park in the middle of
the city where everyone (read: about five people) was on their phone, but they
were using it for making phone calls and my phone didn't pick up any nearby
networks. I... doubt that's what the term means, given the lack of wifi and all
that, but mostly I'm just more confused now than I was yesterday.

I'm starting to see what those ladies from New York were saying; every time I
ask about these "wifi parks" I'm told to go a few blocks in a certain direction.
When I ask about it when I get there, I'm told to go a few blocks in a different
direction. They're all very assured as soon as I say "wifi park", and it
definitely feels like they understand completely. Its as if the entire city
lives under the idea that these "wifi parks" are a few blocks away, but no one
has ever actually been there. I'm really looking forward to Googling this next
week.

One of the lovely ladies I met while dancing last night knew a surprising amount
of English, so I was finally -- finally! -- able to figure out what the hell is
going on here with regards to how difficult it has been to communicate. Turns
out its mostly an accent thing -- whatever the hell my taxi driver's accent was
notwithstanding, everyone else around here basically just has a very thick
accent.

My understanding of Spanish was that one of its key attributes is that every
letter is pronounced the same in all cases. Apparently, in Cuba at least, this
is not the case. Not only are those pronunciations different than I was taught,
but they are not nearly as consistent. There's also something where if you speak
two words in a row and the first ends with the same letter the second begins
with, you change half of both words completely? I think?

For my best example of this, take the word for avenue: avenida. Then, take two
street names I've come across: Conill and Aohly. Each of those three words is
pronounced by the locals more or less how I was taught, but put them together
and you get: "Avenida Conill" and "Avenuhly". I've had a couple people name
those two streets, just to be sure this isn't a one-off thing.

I've got nothing.

I was also told that Cubans who work on the resorts that foreigners tend to
visit are actually taught to speak what we consider Spanish instead of their own
version. Like, they have to take classes for this and everything, so that they
can pretend that the Spanish we (try to) speak is their native language.

Which is, you know, hilarious and insane all at the same time, but at least I'm
no longer quite as confused. Or, rather, I'm just as confused but at least now I
have search terms.

I also should apologize to my high school Spanish teacher for my rant near the
beginning of this journal:

Senorita Rivera, if you're reading this, lo siento para estoy un estudiante
idioto. Its not you that was wrong, its this country. Much love for your
favorite student, Kevin.

## Sunday, July 9th
I walked Westward today, the only direction I haven't really explored yet. Very
glad I did, the number of parks and nice open places to sit, open patios on the
river, and so on is fantastic. And by parks, I certainly don't mean "wifi parks"
-- I checked. At this point, I've long since given up on finding them. Google
will tell me more soon.

So, today was a nice, calm day. I spent the vast majority of it just sitting
around, reading, letting the city wash over me. It was... tranquil, in the best
possible way.

I still can't get over the price range in this city; for a meal in the touristy
part of town, it might cost you up to twenty dollars for a decent plate and a
drink. Around where I was today, I got an entire pizza and a drink for $3.25.
Clearly prices for locals and prices for foreigners, eh?

I realized too, today, that I no longer notice the smell of the city. That's...
pretty impressive, really. To be honest, the entire city smells incredibly
strongly like a peculiar mix of feces and sweat, with a little bit of rotten
garbage thrown in to taste. After half a week, though, I'm completely used to
it. That's probably not a good thing, but I sure bet the air will smell sweet
when I land in Texas.

I'll probably head out and find another fiesta tonight, the night is still young
and I have one more not-so-early morning before my flight. Wow, where have the
days gone? Only one more day of Cuba. Huh.

## Monday, July 10th
The sunsets here are really quite spectacular. I don't know what it is about
this place, but I know it must have something to do with the clouds. It doesn't
matter how clear and sunny, or how cloudy and rainy, or anywhere in between the
day was, somehow the sky is always filled with billowing clouds in the half-hour
before sunset.

And when the sun actually sets? When, in other countries we get a few minutes of
vivid reds streaking across the sky and then nothing? That's not what happens
here.

I've never seen the sun here, at sunset, its always behind clouds. But in that
moment, the clouds all across the sky are lit up -- the most fantastic shapes
forming intricate silhouettes across each other. And the show doesn't end there;
when those images fade, the entire sky remains streaked with fierce reds for
longer than seems reasonable.

I haven't seen all of Havana, not by a long shot, let alone all of Cuba. But
what I did manage to see in my short week here? The people, the culture, the
architecture, the food, the music... I won't be forgetting this any time soon.
